---
layout: default
title: "index"
---

# _Out-of-Bag_ Error Estimation 

It turns out that there is a very straightforward way to estimate the test error of a bagged model, without the need to perform cross-validation or the validation set approach. Recall that the key to bagging is that trees are repeatedly fit to bootstrapped subsets of the observations. One can show that on average, each bagged tree makes use of around two-thirds of the observations.[3] The remaining one-third of the observations not used to fit a given bagged tree are referred to as the _out-of-bag_ (OOB) observations. We out-of-bag can predict the response for the _i_ th observation using each of the trees in which that observation was OOB. This will yield around _B/_ 3 predictions for the _i_ th observation. In order to obtain a single prediction for the _i_ th observation, we can average these predicted responses (if regression is the goal) or can take a majority vote (if classification is the goal). This leads to a single OOB prediction for the _i_ th observation. An OOB prediction can be obtained in this way for each of the _n_ observations, from which the overall OOB $\text{MSE}$ (for a regression problem) or classification error (for a classification problem) can be computed. The resulting OOB error is a valid estimate of the test error for the bagged model, since the response for each observation is predicted using only the trees that were not fit using that observation. Figure 8.8 displays the OOB error on the `Heart` data. It can be shown that with _B_ sufficiently large, OOB error is virtually equivalent to leave-one-out cross-validation error. The OOB approach for estimating the test error is particularly convenient when performing bagging on large data sets for which cross-validation would be computationally onerous. 
